>> Well, Ken, you've certainly
spent a number of years
on these questions.
I'm talking with
Dr. Kenneth Ring.
We're in the Prague
Botanical Gardens.
Dr. Ring is the author
of "The Omega Project"
and is the world's
leading expert
on the near-death experience.
Ken, I know recently you've
been interested in UFOs.
How did you get from
near-death experiences to UFOs?
That seems quite a leap.
>> Well, on one
perhaps mistaken day,
I picked up a copy of Whitley
Strieber's book "Communion",
came out some years ago.
And though I had no interest
in, and in fact an aversion
to UFO studies,
I found that some
of the effects
that he was talking
about of those experiences
seemed very reminiscent
of those that followed NDEs.
And so I wanted to
explore the connection.
>> Very interesting.
I see what you mean.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Well, why do you think it is
that these abduction phenomenon
never happen to what I
would call smart people?
In other words, it's
only some poor soul
who lives in a trailer
park who has this happen.
>> No, I don't think so.
I think that there are people
who have these experiences that
come from a pretty wide
swath of the social register,
up and down.
What I found in my
studies is actually,
the people who are prone
to these experiences
are folks with a
troubled background.
They often report
traumatic childhoods.
They report sexual abuse,
stressful childhoods.
They're people who,
even as children, seemed
to be susceptible
not to fantasy,
but to alternate realities.
Not everybody is
equally likely to have
this kind of experience.
I don't think these
folks are pathological
or come from some
particular social stratum.
But they have
particular kinds of
psychological
characteristics that
predispose them to have
these kinds of experiences.
>> How do you relate this
phenomenon to your own field
of expertise, which is
the near-death experience?
>> What I found is if you look
at the phenomena themselves,
they seem extremely different
in terms of their feature
surfaces.
You look at the
near-death experience,
it's a very blissful
experience, it's very beautiful.
People have very many positive
things to say about it.
You look at the
abduction experience,
people are traumatized
by it, deeply frightened,
disturbed by it.
They seem at antipodes.
But if you look at the
structure of these experiences,
the structure is the same.
They have the structure shamanic
journeys, of initiations.
You're taken from
the ordinary world.
You're taken to another world.
You learn things.
You are transformed
in that world,
and you bring back those
transformations with you.
What I found was that the
same kind of background that's
typical for people that
report UFO encounters,
not limited to but
including abductions,
is exactly the same
kind of profile
that you find for
people that have had
NDEs, near-death experiences.
Same kind of person
is prone to them.
So I talk about an
encounter-prone personality
who's susceptible or vulnerable
to these kinds of experiences
more than the average person.
But the key thing that
relates these two phenomena,
and perhaps others like
them, are the transformations
that tend to take place in
the lives of people afterward.
People with both
kinds of experiences
say afterward they are
more appreciative of life,
more appreciative of nature.
They have a deeper
feeling of self-worth.
They are more
compassionate individuals,
less materialistic.
They are more spiritual.
They're not necessarily
more religious.
In fact, they may
be less religious,
but they're more spiritual.
They're more psychic.
They're more intuitive.
What seems to be the outcome
of these experiences is however
different the
experiences themselves
may be in their content,
the effect is the same.
You go through an ordeal
of either nearly dying
or the shock of a UFO
encounter, and you're
changed by that experience.
Like Nietzsche said, that
which doesn't kill me
makes me stronger.
These people are
stronger spiritually.
They seem to function
at higher levels
of intuitive understanding,
of psychic awareness.
It's an expanding
experience for both.
>> Well, it's interesting that
the personality profile is
the same, but in one case,
the reaction is positive,
the other negative.
Do people have
near-death experiences
without coming near to death?
>> Sure.
There are lots of ways.
I think the near-death
experience is misleading
because it implies there's
something unique that happens
at the point of
physical death or when
people enter clinical death.
And that's not true.
There are many
different pathways
that lead to essentially
the same experiences
without having to throw yourself
under the tires of the nearest
oncoming truck,
many different ways
to get into this
kind of experience.
>> So relate it a little bit
to the psychedelic experience.
>> I'd be happy to.
I've talked with
a lot of people--
I'm sure you've
talked to many more--
who have had high dose LSD
sessions or other kinds
of psychedelic sessions
who have told me,
in effect, well, I never
came close to death
but I know exactly
what you mean when
you talk about a
near-death experience
because I've had the same thing,
the out-of-body experience,
the feeling of moving into a
beautiful, radiant, illuminated
space, the sense
of being flooded
with total universal
knowledge, of being transformed
in the instant and bringing
that transformation back.
To me, it's like the light
or spiritual reality,
or whatever this
thing may be called,
is available all the time.
There are just different
access routes to it.
The psychedelic is
clearly one route
that leads to that destination.
The near-death
experiences is another.
People following a spiritual
path and deeply committed to it
could have the same
kind of revelation,
the same kinds of insights.
So I think that it's a question
of equifinality, many different
pathways leading to
the same destination,
and the same
transformative effects.
That's what I think is important
about those experiences.
>> Well, now, we've had
psychedelic experiences
and near-death experiences
presumably for millennia.
Is this abduction thing new?
Or are we just getting
the old stuff repackaged,
in a funny way?
>> Well, I think that it's
related to things that have
always happened to humankind.
You know, interaction with the
invisible world of spirits.
Your phrase, I think,
was sylphs of the air,
the elementals, the fairies.
Folklore, I think,
is certainly related
to this particular phenomenon.
However, even among
folklorists like Eddie Bullard,
for example, who's the one
who's looked into this most
closely from the standpoint of
the UFO abduction phenomenon,
there seem to be aspects of this
experience that make it unique
unto itself, make it similar
to the folkloric experiences
of former times.
And yet it's in a kind
of technological gloss,
I think maybe
because the alien is
kind of the mythic
archetype of our time.
It's not fashionable to see
angels and spirits and demons
anymore, but the myth
of the extraterrestrial
is everywhere you look.
And so I think in a way, this
particular kind of archetype
has been clothed in the imagery
and the kind of space age
technology and talk
and so on that's
characteristic of our own time.
So I think there's
something unique to it
and something that relates
to the folkloric experiences
of former times,
too, because contact
between the invisible world
and the physical world,
that's probably as
old as man is old.
>> But essentially, it sounds
as though you're fundamentally
a psychologist in that you
don't take this at face value.
>> No.
I don't take these as literal
experiences of an incursion
into physical
space time reality,
of little beings
from other places
that have come to do
nasty things to people.
That, oddly enough--
it seems odd to me--
seems to be the dominant
view of America ufologists.
I'm not a ufologist.
As you say, I'm a psychologist.
In Europe I think of
the interpretation
is quite different.
I don't take these
experiences literal,
but I take them as real
within an alternate reality,
within what Henri Corbet
calls an imaginal realm.
They're real enough.
For example, people who
have near-death experiences
will say things like this
experience was more real to me
than you and I sitting here
talking about it is real.
It's more real than life itself.
There is a reality
to these experiences,
but I think it's
a profound mistake
to think it's the same
thing as space time
ordinary sensory world reality.
>> So what you're saying is that
these are symbolic constructs.
>> Yes.
There's a symbolic
aspect to them.
And I think the
important thing--
you know, I think there are
two attitudes toward the UFO
question.
It's a mystery, but there
are two types of mysteries.
There are mysteries like
in detective stories that
beg for some kind of
solution, and you only
feel satisfaction when the
solution at the end is revealed
and all the reasons given.
Then there are mysteries that
are meant to be explored--
>> True mysteries.
>> To be savored.
Yes.
True mysteries.
And these mysteries
beg for exploration,
not for explanation, if
I can put it that way.
And the UFO seems to me--
the UFO phenomenon is
the second category of mystery.
That's why I
personally, and perhaps
temperamentally, I'm
opposed to the idea
of trying to package it as
though it were something
as simple as other beings,
however amazing that would be
in itself, other beings coming
from other places in the galaxy
to invade or to have some
contact in human affairs.
I think the mystery is
likely to be much more
profound than that.
And another thing, if I may
say, that I think hooks together
the near-death experience
with the UFO experience,
whatever its basis may be,
is when people come out
of these experiences and
have worked it through,
they come to have
a world view that
is very similar to
one another and is
very similar to what's
being talked about all
the time at this conference.
And that's an
ecological worldview.
The heightening of
ecological sensitivity,
the increase of concern with
the welfare of the planet,
is one thing that
unites this two
people, even though they
have these very disparate
experiences.
What they say about
what they've learned
from these experiences, what
the meaning of these experiences
for them is that the fate of
the Earth is in our hands,
and we better wake up to do
something about it very quick.
So I see these
experiences, perhaps,
being orchestrated by--
I think this is
similar to your view,
perhaps-- a planetary mind,
an overmind, a mind at large,
which is, in some sense, the
expression of our deepest
yearnings and perhaps
our deepest fears that
are feeding back these kinds of
experiences in the form of kind
of archetypal experiences,
archetypal images, so as
to impress people who might not
otherwise be impressed to take
the kind of action
necessary to correct
the direction in which
the Earth is headed.
>> So it's a kind
of confoundment.
Its purpose is to
be inexplicable.
>> Exactly.
That's exactly how
I conclude my book.
I say the point of
these experiences
is to be baffled by them,
almost as though they're
a kind of a koan that
we're not meant to solve,
but we're meant to kind of chew
over until our rational mind
cracks and we begin to
think in entirely new ways,
and hopefully act in
entirely new ways.
>> So it's a way of
keeping us from closure.
>> Exactly.
It's sort of a deconstruction
phenomenon, you could even say.
>> It's saying to us the world
is not so simple as you might
choose to suppose.
>> Exactly so.
[MUSIC PLAYING]